Add LEP - automatic rebalance replica (#2581)
longhorn/longhorn: enhancements/20210510-automatic-rebalance-replica.md

# Automatic Replica Rebalance

> Have a Longhorn setting to enable automatic distribution of the off-balanced replicas when a new node is added to the cluster.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Have a Longhorn setting to enable automatic distribution of the off-balanced replicas when a newly available node to the cluster
```

Author: Fixed.

## Summary

When nodes are offline with setting `Replica Node Level Soft Anti-Affinity` enabled, the replicas could be duplicated on the same node if the remain cluster node number is less than the replica number.

> Currently, the user needs to be aware when nodes are offline and a new node is added back to the cluster to manually delete the replicas to rebalance onto the new node.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Currently, the user needs to be aware when nodes are offline and a new node is added back to the cluster to manually delete the replicas to rebalance onto the newly available node.
```

Author: Fixed.

> This enhancement proposes to add a new Longhorn setting `Replica Node Level Auto Balancing` to enable detection and deletion of the unbalanced replica to achieve automatic rebalancing.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This enhancement proposes is to add a new Longhorn setting `Replica Node Level Auto Balancing` to enable detection and deletion of the unbalanced replica to achieve automatic rebalancing.
```

### Related Issues

- https://github.com/longhorn/longhorn/issues/587
- https://github.com/longhorn/longhorn/issues/570

## Motivation

### Goals

> Have a Support replica auto balance.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Support replica automatic balancing.
```

Author: Fixed.

### Non-goals [optional]
`n/a`

## Proposal

> Add new setting `Replica Node Level Auto Balancing` to trigger replica deletion when a new node is available to cluster.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Add new setting `Replica Node Level Auto Balancing` to enable replica automatic balancing when a newly available node to the cluster.
```

Author: Fixed.

### User Stories

> Before this enhancement user needs to check and manually delete replicas to have replicas schedule to the new node. If the user does not take action, this could lead to no redundancy volumes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Before this enhancement, the user needs to check and manually delete replicas to have deleted replicas reschedule to newly available nodes. If the user does not take action, this could lead to no redundancy volumes.
```

Author: Fixed.

> After this enhancement user does not need to worry about manually balancing replicas when nodes are offline.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After this enhancement, the user does not need to worry about manually balancing replicas when there are newly available nodes.
```

#### Story 1 - node temporary offline
As a system administrator, 

> When a cluster node is offline and comes back online after some time, I want Longhorn to automatically detect and schedule replicas evenly to all nodes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When a cluster node is offline and comes back online after some time, I want Longhorn to automatically detect and reschedule replicas evenly to all nodes.
```

Author: Fixed.

> So I do not have to worry and standby 24/7 to check and manually rebalance replicas when nodes are down.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
So I do not have to worry and standby 24/7 to check and manually rebalance replicas when there are newly available nodes.
```

#### Story 2 - add new node

As a system administrator, 

> When a cluster node is offline and a new cluster is added, I want Longhorn to automatically detect and schedule replicas evenly to all nodes

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When a cluster node is offline and a new cluster is added, I want Longhorn to automatically detect and reschedule replicas evenly to all nodes
```

Author: Fixed.

> So I do not have to worry and standby 24/7 to check and manually rebalance replicas when nodes are down.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
So I do not have to worry and standby 24/7 to check and manually rebalance replicas when there are newly available nodes.
```

Author: Fixed.

### User Experience In Detail

With an example of 3 nodes in cluster and default of 3 replicas volume:
1. When the user enabled `replica-soft-anti-affinity` and deployed PVC and Pod on node-1. The replica is distributed evenly to all 3 nodes at this point.
2. In case of node-2 is offline, the user will see replica was on node2 gets re-scheduled to node-1 or node-3. And also icon and note will appear on UI `Limited node redundancy: at least one healthy replica is running at the same node as another`.

**Before enhancement**
3. Bring node-2 online, no change will be done automatically by Longhorn. The user will still see the same warning on UI.
4. To rebalance replicas, the user needs to find and delete the duplicated replica to trigger the schedule onto node-2. 

**After enhancement**
3. Longhorn automatically detects and deletes the duplicated replica so the replica will be scheduled onto node-2. User will see the duplicated replica get rescheduled back to node-2 and UI will see volume `Healthy` with the note `Limited node redundancy: at least one healthy replica is running at the same node as another` removed.

### API changes

> There is no API change

Reviewer: Actually, we have the contract change for the new setting.

Author: Thank you for point out. I think we can use /v1/settings, updated the PR.

## Design

### Implementation Overview

#### longhorn-manager

> 1. Add new setting `Replica Node Level Auto Balancing`.

Reviewer: What's the default value? If enabled, any side effects or notice users need to be aware of.

      2. Try to get node duplicates mapped by nodeID.
      3. Return number to replenish when maximum replica names in duplicates mapping is 2 greater than the minimum replica names in duplicates mapping.
  5. Add the number to rebalance to `replenishCount` in `replenishReplicas`.

- Cleanup extra replicas for auto-balance in `cleanupExtraHealthyReplicas`.
  1. Get replica names.
      - For `best-effort`, use the replica names from duplicates in the most duplicated zones/nodes. 
      - For `least-effort`, use the replicas names from `getPreferredReplicaCandidatesForDeletion`.
  3. Delete one replicas from the replica names.

### Test plan

#### Integration tests - test_replica_auto_balance_least_effort

Scenario: replica auto-balance with `least_effort`.

#### Integration tests - test_replica_auto_balance_best_effort

Scenario: replica auto-balance with `best_effort`.

#### Integration tests - test_replica_auto_balance_disabled_volume_spec_enabled

Scenario: replica should auto-balance individual volume when global setting `replica-auto-balance` is `disabled` and volume spec `replicaAutoBalance` is `least_effort`.

> #### Integration tests - test_replica_auto_balance_least_effort

Reviewer: zone_least_effort

Author: Fixed.

1. When the user enabled `replica-soft-anti-affinity` and deployed PVC and Pod on node-1. The replica is distributed evenly to all 3 nodes at this point.
2. In case of node-2 is offline, the user will see replica was on node2 gets re-scheduled to node-1 or node-3. And also icon and note will appear on UI `Limited node redundancy: at least one healthy replica is running at the same node as another`.

**Before enhancement**
3. Bring node-2 online, no change will be done automatically by Longhorn. The user will still see the same warning on UI.
4. To rebalance replicas, the user needs to find and delete the duplicated replica to trigger the schedule onto node-2. 

**After enhancement**
3. Longhorn automatically detects and deletes the duplicated replica so the replica will be scheduled onto node-2. User will see the duplicated replica get rescheduled back to node-2 and UI will see volume `Healthy` with the note `Limited node redundancy: at least one healthy replica is running at the same node as another` removed.

### API changes
There is no API change. The new global setting `Replica Node Level Auto Balancing` will use the same /v1/settings API.

> 

Reviewer 2: Besides, there is a new field in volume resources.

Author: Thanks, fixed.

## Design

### Implementation Overview

#### longhorn-manager
1. Add new global setting `Replica Node Level Auto Balancing`.
  - The setting is boolean.
  - The default value is `False`.

2. Add new volume spec `AutoBalance`.

>   - The default value is nil.

Reviewer 2: The default value is `false`

Author: Addressed.

2. In Volume Controller, check and rebalance replica during `syncVolume`, `replenishReplicas`.
  1. Skip replica rebalance if setting `Replica Node Level Auto Balancing` is `False` or,
     if volume spec `AutoBalance` is `False`.
  2. Create a function to check and return: the number of replicas to rebalance and a list of duplicated replica names.

>     1. Record replica names if DiskID is duplicated for the volume.

Reviewer 2: `DiskID`? or you mean the related Node?

Author: Thank you for the hint. Updated to use Node ID instead.

>     2. Find the number of volume owners.

Reviewer 2: What are `volume owners`? The nodes that contain the running volume replicas?

Author: Thank you for the hint. Updated to use Node ID instead.

    3. Find the number of ready and schedulable nodes.
    4. Return 0 if replicas are balanced: owner equals schedulable and allow scheduling nodes.
    5. Returns available node number if the number of owners is less than `NumberOfReplicas`, or
       Return the number of replicas to be rebalanced: NumberOfReplicas - owners.
  3. Add the replica balance number to replenish the replica count.
  4. Clean duplicated replicas in `cleanupExtraHealthyReplicas`.
    1. Do nothing if the number of healthy replicas is less than the volume spec number of replicas.
    2. Do nothing if the replica is not balanced.
    3. Delete duplicated replicas one at a time.

### Test plan

#### Integration tests - test_replica_auto_balance

> ```

Reviewer 2: Why using ``` to wrap the test steps... Same below.

Author: Addressed.

6.  Disable scheduling and evict node-3.
7.  Wait for replicas to schedule to node-1, node-2.
8.  Enable scheduling for node 3.
9.  Wait for replicas to schedule to node-1, node-2, node-3.
10. Verify data checksum.
```

#### Integration tests - test_replica_auto_balance_one_node
```
Test replica auto balance when all replicas are on the same node

1. Set `replica-soft-anti-affinity` to `true`.
2. Set `replica-auto-rebalance` to `true`.
3. Disable scheduling node-2, node-3.
4. Create a volume with 3 replicas.
5. Attach the volume and write some data to it.
6. Wait for replicas to schedule to node-1.
7. Enable scheduling for node-2, node-3.
8. Wait for replicas to schedule to node-1, node-2, node-3.
9. Verify data checksum.
```

#### Integration tests - volume spec AutoBalance disabled

```
Given cluster with 3 nodes
And 2 volume with 3 replicas created
And volume-2 with volume spec `AutoBalance` disabled.
And node-2 and node-3 down
And all replicas on node-1
When node-2 and node 3 up
Then replica scheduled to node-1, node-2, node-3 for volume-1
And replica not scheduled to node-1 for volume-2
And cleanup settings
```

#### Manual tests - 1 node offline, 2 node online

```

> Given cluster with 3 nodes

Reviewer 2: Add step number for manual tests. e.g.:

1. Given cluster with 3 nodes and Longhorn setting
```
kubectl -n longhorn-system --type=merge patch settings/replica-soft-anti-affinity -p '{"value": "true"}'
kubectl -n longhorn-system get settings/replica-soft-anti-affinity
kubectl -n longhorn-system --type=merge patch settings/replica-replenishment-wait-interval -p '{"value": "1"}'
kubectl -n longhorn-system get settings/replica-replenishment-wait-interval
kubectl -n longhorn-system --type=merge patch settings/replica-auto-rebalance -p '{"value": "true"}'
kubectl -n longhorn-system get settings/replica-auto-rebalance
```
2. Create a Pod using a 3-replica Longhorn volume on `node-1`
......

Author: I think we would benefit to adopt to BDD-style Given/When/Then when writing tests. This gives a clearer way to show the prepare/test/result phases. It's currently looking a bit confusing because integration tests are using steps, so I will change them as well.

Add a new setting in volume spec `replicaAutoBalance` to enable/disable automatic replica rebalancing for individual volume.

### User Stories

Before this enhancement, the user needs to check and manually delete replicas to have deleted replicas reschedule to newly available nodes. If the user does not take action, this could lead to no redundancy volumes.

After this enhancement, the user does not need to worry about manually balancing replicas when there are newly available nodes.

#### Story 1 - node temporary offline
As a system administrator,

When a cluster node is offline and comes back online after some time, I want Longhorn to automatically detect and reschedule replicas evenly to all nodes.

So I do not have to worry and standby 24/7 to check and manually rebalance replicas when there are newly available nodes.

#### Story 2 - add new node

As a system administrator,

When a cluster node is offline and a new node is added, I want Longhorn to automatically detect and reschedule replicas evenly to all nodes

So I do not have to worry and standby 24/7 to check and manually rebalance replicas when there are newly available nodes.

> #### Story 3 - zone offline

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Story 3 - zone temporary offline
```

Author: Fixed.

3. Bring zone-2 online, no change will be done automatically by Longhorn. The user will still see replicas all running in zone-1.
4. To rebalance replicas, the user needs to find and delete the duplicated replica to trigger the schedule to zone-2.

**After enhancement**
3. Longhorn automatically detects and deletes the duplicated replica so the replica will be scheduled to zone-2. The user will see the duplicated replica get rescheduled back to zone-2.

### API changes
- The new global setting `Replica Auto Balancing` will use the same /v1/settings API.
- When creating a new volume, the body of the request sent to /v1/volumes has a new field `disableReplicaRebalance` set to boolean.
- Implement a new API for users to update `disableReplicaRebalance` setting for individual volume. The new API could be /v1/volumes/<VOLUME_NAME>?action=updateDisableReplicaRebalance. This API expects the request's body to have the form {disableReplicaRebalance:<BOOLEAN>}.

## Design

### Implementation Overview

#### longhorn-manager
- Add new global setting `Replica Auto Balancing`.
  - The setting is boolean.
  - The default value is `False`.

- Add new volume spec `DisableReplicaRebalance`.

>   - The default value is `False`.

Author: Thanks for noticing, I think it's better to use `replicaAutoBalance` with the available value of `enabled` and `disabled` to avoid confusion and the default value will be the same as the global setting.

>   - The default value is `False`.

Reviewer 2: To totally avoid confusion or misunderstanding, this field can be an enum with 3 options: `enabled`, `disabled`, and `follow the global setting`/`ignored`.

>   - The default value is `False`.

Author: The `ignore` option sounds good to me. And will also try to replace `enable` with `least-effort` and `best-effort`.

- In Volume Controller, check and rebalance replica during `syncVolume`, `replenishReplicas`.
  1. Skip volume replica rebalance when global setting `Replica Auto Balancing` is `False`

>   2. Skip volume replica rebalance when volume spec `DisableReplicaRebalance` is `True`.

Author: Thanks, removed the global setting check, I think it's better to check only volume spec.

  3. Calculate number to rebalance when there are duplicates in zones, if,

>       - global setting `Replica Zone Level Soft Anti-Affinity` is `True`.

Author: Thanks for catching this, I think it should be safe to remove the condition, so it will always check for zone first.

>       - global setting `Replica Zone Level Soft Anti-Affinity` is `True`.

Author: I've also included this scenario in integration tests.
```
Scenario: replica auto-balance to different zone when zone anti-affinity is disabled.
```

  4. Calculate number to rebalance when there are duplicates on nodes, if,
      - global setting `Replica Zone Level Soft Anti-Affinity` is `True` and cannot find duplicates in zones.

>       - global setting `Replica Zone Level Soft Anti-Affinity` is `False`.

Reviewer 2: With this limitation, can Longhorn do auto rebalance for the following case:

1. `Replica Zone Level Soft Anti-Affinity` is `True`. 
2. There are 3 replicas and 2 zones. And 2 replicas are in the same zone and even on the same node.
3. Add a new node to the above zone that contains 2 replicas.

Author: Replica auto-balance will look for available nodes if cannot find an available zone.

I've included this scenario in the integration tests.
```
Scenario: replica auto-balance to same zones when zone anti-affinity is enabled.
```

  5. Add the number to rebalance to `replenishCount` in `replenishReplicas`.

- Calculate number to rebalance when there are duplicates in zones.
  1. List all the occupied node zones with volume replicas running.
  2. List all available nodes with conditions:
     - node is schedulable.
     - node zone not duplicated with any of the current running replicas.
     - node has no volume replica running.
  3. Do nothing:

>      - When the number of running replica is less than the number of replicas in volume spec.

Reviewer 2: You can consider this (volume `healthy`) as a prerequisite rather than checking it during the auto rebalance.

Author: Good suggestion. Addressed.

     - When available nodes list is empty.
     - When the number of replicas in volume spec is equal to occupied node zones.
  4. Calculate the number of replicas to rebalance:

>      - number of replicas in volume spec - number of occupied node zones.

Reviewer 2: Min{number of replicas in volume spec - number of occupied node zones, number of zones contains schedulable nodes - number of occupied node zones}

Similar below

Author: I do not understand this. Can you elaborate?

Author: [4.] is only part of the formula. 

Take your case with the volume with 5 replicas:

Case-1:
If there is no new zone added, it will return 0 to rebalance, because both zones contain running replicas, and nodes within zone-A and zone-B will not be counted as the available nodes.
```
2. List all available nodes with conditions: 
- node zone not duplicated with any of the current running replicas.
3. Do nothing:
     - When available nodes list is empty.
```

Case-2:
If zone-C is then added with 2 replicas then the replicas to rebalance would return 1.

Case-3:
if 4 zones are added, then the replicas would return 3.

Reviewer 2: OK. This calculation is complicated. I am thinking if we can directly use the following logic:

1. List available zones (contains node schedulable for the volume replicas):
    1. Reschedule the node-level duplicates replica to one node of each available zone
    2. If the node-level duplicates replica count is 0, then reschedule the zone-level duplicates replica to one node of each available zone.
2. List available nodes (that doesn't contain the volume replica but is schedulable for the replicas):
    1. Reschedule the node-level duplicates replica to one node of each available zone.

This avoids the calculation while getting the final rebalance result.

Author: Removed affinity settings conditions.

Reviewer 2: I mean, with the above simple flow, we can avoid considering so many conditions and calculating the rebalance number separately. Not sure if it make sense for you.

Author: To put it simply, rebalance is done in 2 phases, rebalance zones then rebalance nodes. This from my understanding is similar to your statement. I've reworded the implementation so hopefully takes away the distractions of the conditions.

As for affinity settings, it will be ignored to leave for ReplicaScheduler to handle.

Reviewer 2: Nice rewording. It's much clear now.

>   5. Return the number of available nodes if less than the number to rebalance, or return the number to rebalance.

Reviewer 2: The auto rebalance should happen during the calculation. Is returning this number meaningful?

Similar below

Author: The plan is to add the returned as part of 
[replenishCount](https://github.com/longhorn/longhorn-manager/blob/master/controller/volume_controller.go#L1501).

# Automatic Replica Rebalance

> Have a Longhorn global setting and volume spec to enable/disable automatic distribution of the off-balanced replicas when a node is newly available to the cluster.

Author: Addressed.

## Summary

When nodes are offline with setting `Replica Zone Level Soft Anti-Affinity` enabled, or `Replica Node Level Soft Anti-Affinity` enabled, the replicas could be duplicated on the same zone/node if the remain cluster zone/node number is less than the replica number.

Currently, the user needs to be aware when nodes are offline and a new node is added back to the cluster to manually delete the replicas to rebalance onto the newly available node.

> This enhancement proposes is to add a new Longhorn global setting `Replica Auto Balance` to enable detection and deletion of the unbalanced replica to achieve automatic rebalancing. And this enhancement also proposes to add a new volume spec `replicaAutoBalance` to enable/disable automatic replica rebalancing for individual volume.

Author: Addressed.

### Related Issues

- https://github.com/longhorn/longhorn/issues/587
- https://github.com/longhorn/longhorn/issues/570

## Motivation

### Goals

Support global replica automatic balancing.  

> Support individual volume replica automatic balancing.

Author: Addressed.

### Non-goals [optional]
[Clean up old Data after node failure](https://github.com/longhorn/longhorn/issues/685#issuecomment-817121946).

## Proposal

> Add new global setting `Replica Auto Balance` to enable replica automatic balancing when a node is newly available to the cluster.

Author: Addressed.

> Add new volume spec `replicaAutoBalance` to enable/disable automatic replica rebalancing for individual volume.

Author: Addressed.

### User Stories

Before this enhancement, the user needs to check and manually delete replicas to have deleted replicas reschedule to newly available nodes. If the user does not take action, this could lead to no redundancy volumes.

After this enhancement, the user does not need to worry about manually balancing replicas when there are newly available nodes.

#### Story 1 - node temporary offline
As a system administrator,

When a cluster node is offline and comes back online after some time, I want Longhorn to automatically detect and reschedule replicas evenly to all nodes.

So I do not have to worry and standby 24/7 to check and manually rebalance replicas when there are newly available nodes.

#### Story 2 - add new node

As a system administrator,

> When a cluster node is offline and a new cluster is added, I want Longhorn to automatically detect and reschedule replicas evenly to all nodes

Author: Addressed.

So I do not have to worry and standby 24/7 to check and manually rebalance replicas when there are newly available nodes.

> #### Story 2 - zone offline

Author: Addressed.

As a system administrator,

When a cluster zone is offline and comes back online after some time, I want Longhorn to automatically detect and reschedule replicas evenly across zones.

So I do not have to worry and standby 24/7 to check and manually rebalance replicas when there are newly available nodes.

> #### Story 3 - replica automatic rebalance for individual volume

Author: Addressed.

As a system administrator,

> When a cluster node is offline and a new cluster is added, I want Longhorn to automatically detect and reschedule replicas evenly to some volumes only.

Author: Addressed.

So I do not have to worry and standby 24/7 to check and manually rebalance replicas when there are newly available nodes.

### User Experience In Detail

#### Story 1 - Replica Node Level Soft Anti-Affinity

With an example of 3 nodes in cluster and default of 3 replicas volume:

> 1. When the user enabled `replica-soft-anti-affinity` and deployed PVC and Pod on node-1. The replica is distributed evenly to all 3 nodes at this point.

Author: Addressed.

> 2. In case of node-2 is offline, the user will see replica was on node2 gets re-scheduled to node-1 or node-3. And also icon and note will appear on UI `Limited node redundancy: at least one healthy replica is running at the same node as another`.

Author: Addressed.

**Before enhancement**
3. Bring node-2 online, no change will be done automatically by Longhorn. The user will still see the same warning on UI.
4. To rebalance replicas, the user needs to find and delete the duplicated replica to trigger the schedule onto node-2. 

**After enhancement**
3. Longhorn automatically detects and deletes the duplicated replica so the replica will be scheduled onto node-2. User will see the duplicated replica get rescheduled back to node-2 and UI will see volume `Healthy` with the note `Limited node redundancy: at least one healthy replica is running at the same node as another` removed.

#### Story 2 - Replica Zone Level Soft Anti-Affinity

With an example of cluster set for 2 zones and default of 2 replicas volume:

> 1. When the user enabled `replica-soft-anti-affinity` and `replica-zone-soft-anti-affinity` and deployed PVC and deployment. The replica is distributed evenly to all 2 zones at this point.

Author: Addressed.

2. In case of zone-2 is offline, the user will see replica was on zone-2 gets re-scheduled to zone-1.

**Before enhancement**
3. Bring zone-2 online, no change will be done automatically by Longhorn. The user will still see replicas all running in zone-1.
4. To rebalance replicas, the user needs to find and delete the duplicated replica to trigger the schedule to zone-2.

**After enhancement**
3. Longhorn automatically detects and deletes the duplicated replica so the replica will be scheduled to zone-2. The user will see the duplicated replica get rescheduled back to zone-2.

### API changes
- The new global setting `Replica Auto Balance` will use the same /v1/settings API.

> - When creating a new volume, the body of the request sent to /v1/volumes has a new field `replicaAutoBalance` set to `disabled` or `enabled`.

Reviewer: After the explanation by @c3y1huang , we need a way to determine if the value set by the user or not.

     - When the number of occupied node IDs is equal to the number of available nodes.
  4. Calculate the number of replicas to rebalance:
     - number of replicas in volume spec - number of occupied node IDs.
  5. Return the number of available nodes if less than the number to rebalance, or return the number to rebalance.

- Cleanup extra healthy replicas for auto-balanced replicas.
  1. Do nothing:
     - `Replica Auto Balancing` is `False`.
     - When the number of healthy replicas is less or equal to the number of replicas in volume spec.
  2. Delete one replica from `getPreferredReplicaCandidatesForDeletion`.

### Test plan

#### Integration tests - test_replica_auto_balance

Scenario: replica auto-balance when previously running on multiple nodes.

Given set `replica-soft-anti-affinity` to `true`.  
And set `replica-auto-balance` to `enabled`.  
And create a volume with 3 replicas.  
And attach the volume to node-1.  
And wait for the volume to be healthy.  
And volume replicas should be running on node-1, node-2, node-3.  
And write some data to the volume.

When disable scheduling and evict node-3.  

> And Wait for replicas to re-schedule to node-1, node-2.

Author: Addressed.

Given set `replica-soft-anti-affinity` to `true`.  
And set `replica-auto-balance` to `disabled`.  
And node-2 scheduling is disabled.  
And node-3 scheduling is disabled.  
And create volume-1 with 3 replicas.  
And create volume-2 with 3 replicas.  
And set volume-2 spec `replicaAutoBalance` to `enabled`.  
And attach volume-1 to node-1.  
And attach volume-2 to node-1.  
And wait for volume-1 to be healthy.  
And wait for volume-2 to be healthy.  
And volume-1 replicas should be running on node-1.  
And volume-2 replicas should be running on node-1.  
And write some data to volume-1.  
And write some data to volume-2.

When enable scheduling for node-2.  
And enable scheduling for node-3.  
And wait for volume-2 replicas to re-schedule to node-1, node-2, node-3.

Then volume-1 replicas should be running on node-1.  
And volume-1 should have 3 replicas running.  
And volume-2 replicas should be running on node-1, node-2, node-3.  
And volume-2 should have 3 replicas running.  
And volume-1 data should be the same as written.  
And volume-2 data should be the same as written.

#### Integration tests - test_replica_auto_balance_zone_anti_affinity_enabled

> Scenario: replica auto-balance with zone anti-affinity enabled.

Author: Addressed.

Given set `replica-soft-anti-affinity` to `true`.  
And set `replica-zone-soft-anti-affinity` to `true`.  
And set node-1 to zone-1.  
And set node-2 to zone-1.  
And set node-3 to zone-2.  
And create a volume with 2 replicas.  
And attach the volume to node-1.  
And zone-1 should contain 1 replica.  
And zone-2 should contain 1 replica.

When disable scheduling and evict node-3.

Then replica should be running on node-1, node-2.  
And zone-1 should contain 2 replicas.  
And zone-2 should contain 0 replicas.

When set volume spec `replicaAutoBalance` to `enabled`.  
And enable scheduling for node-3.

Then wait for replicas to re-schedule to zone-1 and zone-2.  
And zone-1 should contain 1 replica.  
And zone-2 should contain 1 replica.

#### Integration tests - test_replica_auto_balance_to_different_zone_anti_affinity_disabled

> Scenario: replica auto-balance to different zone when zone anti-affinity is disabled.

Author: Addressed.

Given set `replica-soft-anti-affinity` to `true`.  
And set `replica-zone-soft-anti-affinity` to `true`.  
And set node-1 to zone-1.  
And set node-2 to zone-1.  
And set node-3 to zone-2.  
And disable scheduling for node-3.  
And create a volume with 2 replicas.  
And attach the volume to node-1.  
And zone-1 should contain 2 replica.  
And zone-2 should contain 0 replica.

When set `replica-zone-soft-anti-affinity` to `false`.  
And set volume spec `replicaAutoBalance` to `enabled`.  
And enable scheduling for node-3.

Then wait for replicas to re-schedule to zone-1 and zone-2.  
And zone-1 should contain 1 replica.  
And zone-2 should contain 1 replica.

#### Integration tests - test_replica_auto_balance_to_same_zone_anti_affinity_enabled

> Scenario: replica auto-balance to same zones when zone anti-affinity is enabled.

Author: Addressed.

Given set `replica-soft-anti-affinity` to `true`.  
And set `replica-zone-soft-anti-affinity` to `true`.  
And set volume spec `replicaAutoBalance` to `enabled`.  
And set node-1 to zone-1.  
And set node-3 to zone-2.  
And disable scheduling for node-2.  
And create a volume with 3 replicas.  
And attach the volume to node-1.  

> And zone-1 and zone-2 should contain 3 replica in total.

Author: Fixed.

When set node-2 to the zone with duplicated replicas.  
And enable scheduling for node-2.

Then volume replicas should be running on node-1, node-2, node-3.  
And zone-1 should contain 2 replica.  
And zone-2 should contain 1 replica.

> #### Manual tests - 1 node offline, 2 node online

Reviewer: Probably we don't need manual test cases here, because they are similar to the test cases described in the integration tests. (you can add some manual test cases for QA if need)

Author: Removed.

> #### Manual tests - 1 node offline, 2 node online

Author: Manual tests removed.
